MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that play crucial roles in regulating gene expression, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. Dysregulation of miRNA function has been implicated in various diseases, including cancer, where specific miRNAs can act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. Somatic mutations in cancer genomes can affect miRNA binding sites, potentially altering miRNA-mediated gene regulation and contributing to tumorigenesis. These mutations are carried out by various exogenous and endogenous mutational processes, each leaving a unique mutational signature. Understanding how these mutational processes impact miRNA binding is essential for uncovering the molecular mechanisms driving cancer development and progression. Despite advancements in miRNA-mRNA target prediction, current methodologies fail to integrate mutational signatures into their workflows, thereby omitting a critical dimension of understanding.

Classic miRNA-mRNA target prediction tools often use sequence complementarity, along with evolutionary conservation and a few other select features to identify potential binding sites. These foundational approaches often suffer from high false positive rates and limited accuracy. TargetScan and miRanda uses sequence alignment and evolutionary conservation but they do not account mutations at all. Another shortcoming of the current literature is that most of the tools focus on coding regions of the genome, leaving noncoding genome in darkness.

Recent advancements in statistical learning, such as machine learning and deep learning allowed researchers to develop more sophisticated prediction methods. These frameworks leverage large datasets and ever increasing computational power to improve prediction accuracy. However, researchers often focused on static sequence features and do not incorporate the effects of somatic mutations or the mutational processes that may have associated with them. The omission of the dynamic nature of cancer mutations and their underlying mutational processes left a significant gap in the current understanding of how specific mutational processes influence miRNA mediated gene regulation in cancer.

To address the aforementioned limitations, we propose a novel approach that integrates the predictive power of machine learning methods with newly uncovered mutational signatures. The main predictive driver of our approach is XGBoost algorithm, which is a high performant machine learning method. The model is trained on a curated dataset of high confidence miRNA-mRNA pairs and carefully crafted features that captures both sequence and STRUCTURAL information. The handcrafted features were surveyed from the existing prediction methods and rigorously tested to ensure their selectiveness. We also developed our novel features and integrated them in our model training. 

To evaluate how somatic mutations disrupt miRNA binding behavior, we prepared wild type and mutated miRNA-mRNA pairs by applying mutations taken from cancer patients to the sequences. These pairs are processed through our pipeline, where trained classifier assesses whether the mutation enables/disables miRNA binding or has no effect. 

We also incorporated mutational signature data taken from COSMIC to classify every mutation to their related mutational signature. By assigning each mutation to its corresponding mutational signature, which serves as a representation of the underlying mutational processes activated within cells, we aim to bridge the gap between the low-level, individual mutations and the high-level mutational processes. This approach will allow us to observe mutational burden under a new perspective.

Our pipeline is designed to purely sequence based, making it cancer and tissue type agnostic. This flexibility allows our approach to be appropriated to different types of cancer, potentially uncovering previously unknown regulatory dynamics.

